README.md, before:

ocproxy
=======

ocproxy is a user-level SOCKS and port forwarding proxy for
[OpenConnect](http://www.infradead.org/openconnect/)
based on lwIP.  When using ocproxy, OpenConnect only handles network
activity that the user specifically asks to proxy, so the VPN interface
no longer "hijacks" all network traffic on the host.

Basic usage
-----------

Commonly used options include:

      -D port                   Set up a SOCKS5 server on PORT
      -L lport:rhost:rport      Connections to localhost:LPORT will be redirected
                                over the VPN to RHOST:RPORT
      -g                        Allow non-local clients.
      -k interval               Send TCP keepalive every INTERVAL seconds, to
                                prevent connection timeouts

ocproxy should not be run directly.  Instead, it should be started by
openconnect using the --script-tun option:

    openconnect --script-tun --script \
        "./ocproxy -L 2222:unix-host:22 -L 3389:win-host:3389 -D 11080" \
        vpn.example.com

Once ocproxy is running, connections can be established over the VPN link
by connecting directly to a forwarded port or by utilizing the builtin
SOCKS server:

    ssh -p2222 localhost
    rdesktop localhost
    socksify ssh unix-host
    tsocks ssh 172.16.1.2
    ...

OpenConnect can (and should) be run as a non-root user when using ocproxy.


Using the SOCKS5 proxy
----------------------

tsocks, Dante, or similar wrappers can be used with non-SOCKS-aware
applications.

Sample tsocks.conf (no DNS):

    server = 127.0.0.1
    server_type = 5
    server_port = 11080

Sample socks.conf for Dante (DNS lookups via SOCKS5 "DOMAIN" addresses):

    resolveprotocol: fake
    route {
            from: 0.0.0.0/0 to: 0.0.0.0/0 via: 127.0.0.1 port = 11080
            command: connect
            proxyprotocol: socks_v5
    }

[FoxyProxy](http://getfoxyproxy.org/) can be used to tunnel Firefox or Chrome
browsing through the SOCKS5 server.  This will send DNS queries through the
VPN connection, and unqualified internal hostnames (e.g. http://intranet/)
should work.  FoxyProxy also allows the user to route requests based on URL
patterns, so that (for instance) certain domains always use the proxy server
but all other traffic connects directly.

It is possible to start several different instances of Firefox, each with
its own separate profile (and hence, proxy settings):

    # initial setup
    firefox -no-remote -ProfileManager

    # run with previous configured profile "vpn"
    firefox -no-remote -P vpn


Building ocproxy
----------------

Dependencies:

 * libevent &gt;= 2.0: *.so library and headers
 * autoconf
 * automake
 * gcc, binutils, make, etc.

Building from git:

    ./autogen.sh
    ./configure
    make


Other possible uses for ocproxy
-------------------------------

 * Routing traffic from different applications/browsers through different VPNs
(or no VPN)
 * Connecting to multiple VPNs or sites concurrently, even if their IP ranges
overlap or their DNS settings are incompatible
 * Situations in which root access is unavailable or undesirable; multiuser
systems

It is possible to write a proxy autoconfig (PAC) script that decides whether
each request should use ocproxy or a direct connection, based on the domain
or other criteria.

ocproxy also works with OpenVPN; the necessary patches are posted
[here](http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.network.openvpn.devel/8478).


Network configuration
---------------------

ocproxy normally reads its network configuration from the following
environment variables set by OpenConnect:

 * `INTERNAL_IP4_ADDRESS`: IPv4 address
 * `INTERNAL_IP4_MTU`: interface MTU
 * `INTERNAL_IP4_DNS`: DNS server list (optional but recommended)
 * `CISCO_DEF_DOMAIN`: default domain name (optional)

The `VPNFD` environment variable tells ocproxy which file descriptor is used
to pass the tunneled traffic.


vpnns (experimental)
--------------------

Another approach to solving this problem is to create a separate network
namespace (netns).  This is supported by Linux kernels &gt;= v3.8.

This starts up an application in a fresh user/net/uts/mount namespace:

    vpnns -- google-chrome --user-data-dir=/tmp/vpntest
    
    vpnns -- transmission-gtk

Initially it will not have any network access as the only interface
present in the netns is the loopback device.  The application should still
be able to talk to Xorg through UNIX sockets in /tmp.

The next step is to connect to a VPN and invoke `vpnns --attach` to pass
the VPN traffic back and forth:

    openconnect --script "vpnns --attach" --script-tun vpn.example.com

    openvpn --script-security 2 --config example.ovpn \
            --dev "|HOME=$HOME vpnns --attach"

These commands connect to an ocserv or openvpn gateway, then tells vpnns
to set up a tunnel device, default route, and resolv.conf inside the
namespace created above.  On success, the web browser will have connectivity.

`vpnns` can be rerun multiple times if the connection fails or if the VPN
client crashes.  If run without arguments, it will open a shell inside the
namespace.

Some differences between vpnns and ocproxy:

 * No proxies are involved, so apps should not require any special
configuration.
 * vpnns is better-suited to hard-to-proxy protocols such as VOIP or
BitTorrent.
 * vpnns will only ever run on Linux.
 * vpnns may interfere with dbus connections.

Unlike previous approaches to the problem (e.g. anything that involves
running `ip netns`), vpnns does not require root privileges, changing
the host network configuration, or any proxy configuration in the app.


Credits
-------

Original author: David Edmondson &lt;dme@dme.org&gt;

Current maintainer: Kevin Cernekee &lt;cernekee@gmail.com&gt;

Project home page: https://github.com/cernekee/ocproxy

Commit message:

README: vpnns: Document --name and add pointer to PPA
Signed-off-by: Kevin Cernekee <cernekee@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

ocproxy
=======

ocproxy is a user-level SOCKS and port forwarding proxy for
[OpenConnect](http://www.infradead.org/openconnect/)
based on lwIP.  When using ocproxy, OpenConnect only handles network
activity that the user specifically asks to proxy, so the VPN interface
no longer "hijacks" all network traffic on the host.

Basic usage
-----------

Commonly used options include:

      -D port                   Set up a SOCKS5 server on PORT
      -L lport:rhost:rport      Connections to localhost:LPORT will be redirected
                                over the VPN to RHOST:RPORT
      -g                        Allow non-local clients.
      -k interval               Send TCP keepalive every INTERVAL seconds, to
                                prevent connection timeouts

ocproxy should not be run directly.  Instead, it should be started by
openconnect using the --script-tun option:

    openconnect --script-tun --script \
        "./ocproxy -L 2222:unix-host:22 -L 3389:win-host:3389 -D 11080" \
        vpn.example.com

Once ocproxy is running, connections can be established over the VPN link
by connecting directly to a forwarded port or by utilizing the builtin
SOCKS server:

    ssh -p2222 localhost
    rdesktop localhost
    socksify ssh unix-host
    tsocks ssh 172.16.1.2
    ...

OpenConnect can (and should) be run as a non-root user when using ocproxy.


Using the SOCKS5 proxy
----------------------

tsocks, Dante, or similar wrappers can be used with non-SOCKS-aware
applications.

Sample tsocks.conf (no DNS):

    server = 127.0.0.1
    server_type = 5
    server_port = 11080

Sample socks.conf for Dante (DNS lookups via SOCKS5 "DOMAIN" addresses):

    resolveprotocol: fake
    route {
            from: 0.0.0.0/0 to: 0.0.0.0/0 via: 127.0.0.1 port = 11080
            command: connect
            proxyprotocol: socks_v5
    }

[FoxyProxy](http://getfoxyproxy.org/) can be used to tunnel Firefox or Chrome
browsing through the SOCKS5 server.  This will send DNS queries through the
VPN connection, and unqualified internal hostnames (e.g. http://intranet/)
should work.  FoxyProxy also allows the user to route requests based on URL
patterns, so that (for instance) certain domains always use the proxy server
but all other traffic connects directly.

It is possible to start several different instances of Firefox, each with
its own separate profile (and hence, proxy settings):

    # initial setup
    firefox -no-remote -ProfileManager

    # run with previous configured profile "vpn"
    firefox -no-remote -P vpn


Building ocproxy
----------------

Dependencies:

 * libevent &gt;= 2.0: *.so library and headers
 * autoconf
 * automake
 * gcc, binutils, make, etc.

Building from git:

    ./autogen.sh
    ./configure
    make


Other possible uses for ocproxy
-------------------------------

 * Routing traffic from different applications/browsers through different VPNs
(or no VPN)
 * Connecting to multiple VPNs or sites concurrently, even if their IP ranges
overlap or their DNS settings are incompatible
 * Situations in which root access is unavailable or undesirable; multiuser
systems

It is possible to write a proxy autoconfig (PAC) script that decides whether
each request should use ocproxy or a direct connection, based on the domain
or other criteria.

ocproxy also works with OpenVPN; the necessary patches are posted
[here](http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.network.openvpn.devel/8478).


Network configuration
---------------------

ocproxy normally reads its network configuration from the following
environment variables set by OpenConnect:

 * `INTERNAL_IP4_ADDRESS`: IPv4 address
 * `INTERNAL_IP4_MTU`: interface MTU
 * `INTERNAL_IP4_DNS`: DNS server list (optional but recommended)
 * `CISCO_DEF_DOMAIN`: default domain name (optional)

The `VPNFD` environment variable tells ocproxy which file descriptor is used
to pass the tunneled traffic.


vpnns (experimental)
--------------------

Another approach to solving this problem is to create a separate network
namespace (netns).  This is supported by Linux kernels &gt;= v3.8.

This starts up an application in a fresh user/net/uts/mount namespace:

    vpnns -- google-chrome --user-data-dir=/tmp/vpntest
    
    vpnns -- transmission-gtk

Initially it will not have any network access as the only interface
present in the netns is the loopback device.  The application should still
be able to talk to Xorg through UNIX sockets in /tmp.

The next step is to connect to a VPN and invoke `vpnns --attach` to pass
the VPN traffic back and forth:

    openconnect --script "vpnns --attach" --script-tun vpn.example.com

    openvpn --script-security 2 --config example.ovpn \
            --dev "|HOME=$HOME vpnns --attach"

These commands connect to an ocserv or openvpn gateway, then tells vpnns
to set up a tunnel device, default route, and resolv.conf inside the
namespace created above.  On success, the web browser will have connectivity.

`vpnns` can be rerun multiple times if the connection fails or if the VPN
client crashes.  If run without arguments, it will open a shell inside the
namespace.

Some differences between vpnns and ocproxy:

 * No proxies are involved, so apps should not require any special
configuration.
 * vpnns is better-suited to hard-to-proxy protocols such as VOIP or
BitTorrent.
 * vpnns will only ever run on Linux.
 * vpnns may interfere with dbus connections.

Unlike previous approaches to the problem (e.g. anything that involves
running `ip netns`), vpnns does not require root privileges, changing
the host network configuration, or any proxy configuration in the app.

The `--name` option allows additional (and separate) namespaces to be
created.

The OpenVPN example requires out-of-tree patches.  Updated openvpn and
ocproxy packages are available for Ubuntu 14.04 LTS and 16.04 LTS:

    sudo -s
    apt-get install software-properties-common
    add-apt-repository --yes ppa:cernekee
    apt-get update
    apt-get install ocproxy openvpn


Credits
-------

Original author: David Edmondson &lt;dme@dme.org&gt;

Current maintainer: Kevin Cernekee &lt;cernekee@gmail.com&gt;

Project home page: https://github.com/cernekee/ocproxy
